Mt206 Instructor's Manual


Doug Yarger and Vicki Boysen
Iowa State University
Spring Semester 1999



Table of Contents								Page Number

Introduction									2
Preliminary Activities								3
"Ice breakers" for Small Group Activities					3
Graph Interpretation problem sets						3
Weather Map Symbols problem set							3
Forecasting Exercise								3
Purpose										3
Structure									4
Temperature Questions								5
Precipitation Questions								6
Wind Speed and Direction Questions						7
Radiation Balance Simulation							7
Description of Simulation							7
Instructional Goals								8
Assigning RadiationSim								8
Post-Simulation Activity							9
Suggested Thought Questions for Class or Group Discussion			9
Lecture Outline									10
Mountain Simulation								11
Description of Simulation							11
Instructional Goals								11
Assigning MtnSim								12
Post-Simulation Activity							12
Suggested Thought Questions for Class or Group Discussion			13
MtnSim Humidity									13
MtnSim Advection								13
MtnSim Adiabatic								14
Lecture Outline									14
Other course components								14
AdvectionSim									14
Clouds and Storms								14
Severe weather contest								14
Student Evaluation								14









(Note: Underlined words will eventually be Web Links)

Introduction

The origins of this course involved the desire to convert a standard 
meteorology lecture course into one where constructivism was the main 
instructional model and students were expected to take a more active role 
in their own learning-all without reduction of class size!  One of the 
major tools used to accomplish this undertaking was the use of World Wide 
Web server software (ClassNet, http://classnet.cc.iastate.edu/) which 
manages Internet class activities.  This allows every student to be an 
active participant in learning activities with easy access to course 
materials, enhanced communication with the instructor and other students, 
rapid feedback concerning assignment and exam scores, and ready access to 
their private records of course performance.  Course assignments involve 
authentic activities (forecasting), simulated learning environments 
(Java-based simulations) and more standard evaluations of content 
understanding (short-answer responses). 

The course goals have been expanded to include learning how to learn 
science as well as learning science content. The focus of the course is on 
the understanding of weather phenomena, and the primary vehicle for 
learning is an authentic activity where each student routinely predicts 
weather events and supports his or her prediction by identifying 
determining factors.  This weather forecasting activity has been very 
successful in encouraging student participation and in promoting 
understanding in this course.  The forecasts provide a continuing thread 
of meaningful discussion and motivation throughout the semester.

Course materials have been designed for introductory science courses at 
the secondary and college level.  They are intended to be supplemental to 
the course, allowing the instructor to decide which materials to use and 
which to omit.  Experience with these materials has shown that their 
effect, especially the effect of the simulations, is gradual and 
sufficient time must be allowed to observe a difference in student 
behavior and attitude. Students often find the simulations to be 
uncomfortable at first because they use them before they hear the 
corresponding lectures, but this approach is deliberate and is intended to 
create questions in students' minds so they will come to class seeking 
answers.

Part of class time should be allotted to the use of Small Group 
Activities.  These allow students the opportunity to break away from the 
passive mode utilized in most large-scale classes and become more active 
learners.  These activities have been well received by students.  They 
often end up sitting in about the same place in the auditorium for every 
class meeting and usually look forward to interacting with the people who 
sit near them week after week.  Various collaborative activities are used 
to draw each student into the construction of  hypotheses for explaining 
observed scientific phenomena or processes.  Lectures are then used to 
provide explanations when students have explored, tested and questioned 
various factors that relate to central course concepts.

Materials development for the new learning environment did not rely on 
traditional instructional development models.  The new materials could not 
be designed to simply teach the course content when the goal was to 
encourage the learner to explore, conjecture and test ideas.  The chosen 
solution was to develop problem-based simulations that pose scenarios and 
provide tools with which learners can explore, and that accurately reflect 
the results of specific learner's actions.  The materials have served to 
set the stage for further learning by revealing misconceptions, raising 
questions, activating relevant existing knowledge, and alerting the 
learner to the structure and utility of the material to be learned.


Preliminary Activities

"Ice breakers" for Small Group Activities
Graph Interpretation  problem sets
Weather Map Symbols  problem set


Forecasting Exercise

Purpose
Prediction is a key goal of science and one which students eagerly 
embrace.  They quickly realize that to improve their predictive skills 
they must develop additional skills of observation, hypothesis-generation 
and testing, and analysis.  One particular activity that has proven to be 
highly motivating and very effective in creating authentic situations for 
scientific inquiry when used in a large introductory meteorology course is 
a Web-based Weather Forecasting exercise (Figure 1).  This activity has 
become the common thread for the course and serves as an ever-present 
opportunity to apply course concepts in real-world contexts.

The forecasting exercise provides students repeated opportunities to test 
their understanding of various weather processes in a forum that is: 
1.  Goal-directed  (students are asked to predict various weather 
parameters and select the appropriate physical reasons). 
2.  Failure-driven  (situations are created that allow the student to make 
mistakes, followed up by opportunities to learn how to correct these 
mistakes).
3.  Case-based  (lecture discussions of difficult areas now become 
relevant to the student's goal of correcting mistakes).
4.  Based on learning-by-doing  (each student must do a minimum of 25 
forecasts).

 

Figure 1.  Forecasting Exercise



Structure
The forecasting exercise requires that participants use available weather 
products to predict weather parameters for 12Z and 18Z the next day.  
These times were selected to correspond to early morning (thus 
representing nighttime conditions) and mid-day periods for cities across 
the United States.  There are several versions of this activity which have 
been tested in the Mt206 course at ISU: 
1.  The instructor can allow participants to select any available city 
they desire and forecast for current weather conditions.  The codes for 
available cities can be found by accessing the "Find station code" option 
(see Figure 1).
2.  The instructor can specify a city that is the forecast city.  Figure 2 
shows a case where Nashville, TN, was the forecast city for all students.
3.   Because it is now very easy to find weather forecasts for many cities 
on the Internet (e.g., http://www.weather.com/homepage.html) we have 
developed an archival version of the forecast exercise.  Figure 2 is an 
example where the forecast city (Nashville, TN) and the forecast day have 
been pre-selected. The appearance of the forecast page is the same as 
before but now the weather data correspond to designated periods preceding 
the forecast times.

4.   Any of the versions of the forecast exercise can be modified to add 
or delete  forecast questions.  It has been helpful to use a restricted 
set of questions at various times in the course to focus attention on 
specific physical processes.

 

Figure 2.  Archival Forecast Page

Temperature Questions 
The acceptable range for the 18Z daytime temperature forecast has been 
selected to be  +/- 5 °F, although the range can be selected by the 
instructor. The scoring weights we have used give students 3 points for a 
correct answer, 1 point for an answer outside the bound and zero points 
for no submission. These can be changed at the discretion of the 
instructor as well.  In addition to predicting weather parameters, 
participants in the forecast exercise are also asked to provide supporting 
rationales for their predictions.  For the Mt206 course we identified 
several processes that could significantly influence temperature changes. 
These are addressed in the Temperature Influences questions and consist of:
1. Cloudiness
2. Advection
3. Fronts
4. Adiabatic processes

Daytime cloudiness is defined to have a significant influence on the 18Z 
temperature based on the following algorithm: The reporting site is 
evaluated for the times 15Z, 16Z, 17Z and 18Z to determine if two or more 
of these times report at least broken clouds (75% cloud cover). When this 
condition is met, clouds are said to have held down daytime temperature 
(since 18Z is near midday in the United States). 

For this exercise, significant advection is defined as at least a 1 degree 
F. temperature change due to advection occurring in the two hour period 
preceding 18Z (i.e., the total change for two hours, 17Z and 18Z is 1 
degree F or more). This corresponds to a 10 mph wind blowing directly 
across isotherms which have a spacing of about 10 degrees F. over a 
distance corresponding to the N-S dimension of Iowa (about 200 miles) for 
a two hour period.

Fronts can influence temperature in a variety of ways. These influences 
include cloud cover associated with specific frontal types, change of air 
mass as a result of frontal passage, and processes associated with 
precipitation. Because a fast cold front can move about 90 miles in a 
3-hour period, the evaluation procedure checks for the appearance of a 
front in a 2-degree grid containing the selected site during a 3-hour 
period centered on 18Z (i.e. 17Z, 18Z, 19Z).  This corresponds to 
determining whether a front is within 140 miles of the reporting site 
during the 3-hour period centered on 18Z. Warm, occluded and stationary 
fronts are all evaluated using this same criterion. 

Adiabatic processes were explored by having students forecast in a 
mountain region (Reno, NV) to provide them with a practical application of 
this topic in a meteorological  context.  The Java-based simulation 
(https://pals.agron.iastate.edu/simulations/Mtnsim/index.html) has been 
designed to engage students in exploring various factors which are 
associated with air motions on mountain slopes.

Factors that affect nighttime temperature changes are similar to those for 
daytime except that cloud influences are now different. Clouds restrict 
cooling at night because they absorb long-wave radiation emitted by the 
earth's surface and lower atmosphere and re-emit a significant portion 
back. The criterion selected for defining significant restriction of 
radiation cooling is whether there will be 3 or more hours of at least 
broken clouds (i.e., 75% cloud cover) in the 6 hours preceding 12Z (i.e., 
for 7Z to 12Z).


Precipitation Questions
If even a trace of precipitation is reported during the 24-hour period 12Z 
to 12Z, precipitation is defined to have occurred.  Three factors that may 
influence the occurrence of precipitation are:
1. Moisture supply
2. Frontal position
3. Atmospheric instability

The algorithm that is used to evaluate whether the supply of moisture is 
adequate to favor precipitation is based on experience.  A rule of thumb 
is that when the relative humidity is at least 70% at 850mb, overcast 
conditions are usually observed.  At a relative humidity of 90%, there is 
probably precipitation occurring, so 80% is somewhere in between and is 
defined to be a "favorable" value.  The criterion is whether the relative 
humidity is equal to or greater than 80% at 850mb at either 12Z, 00Z or 
the following 12Z time.  Because the moisture supply is expected to change 
slowly, evaluation at these times is considered representative for the 24 
hour period between 12Z and 12Z.  700mb relative humidity analyses can be 
found in the "Weather Products" link at the top of the forecast page (see 
Figure 1).  Although 700mb humidities and 850mb humidities are different, 
80% relative humidities at 700mb are also considered to be good estimates 
of moisture supply.

A grid area of 2 degrees by 2 degrees (about 140 miles by 140 miles) is 
associated with each reporting site for the purpose of evaluating the 
existence of fronts.  If a front of any type is reported within this area 
during the 24-hour period between 12Z and 12Z, this will be defined to be 
a factor for favoring precipitation.

 The algorithm that evaluates whether the atmosphere is sufficiently 
unstable so as to favor precipitation is based on the 850-500mb 
temperature difference for the forecast city.  A temperature difference 
between 850mb and 500mb which is at least 25 degrees Celsius is 
representative of conditional instability and favors upward motion of 
cloudy air parcels and, thus, precipitation.  850mb and 500mb maps with 
temperature analyses are provided in the "Weather Products" section at the 
top of the forecast page (see Figure 1).

Wind Speed and Direction Questions
As with other aspects of the forecasting exercise, the instructor can also 
adjust the criteria for wind speed and direction predictions.  For the 
Mt206 course at ISU, a value within + or - 5 knots of the reported wind 
speed is considered "correct."  A wind direction forecast is considered 
"correct" if it is within + or - one octal of the reported value.

 



Radiation Balance Simulation

Description of Simulation
RadiationSim (Figure 3) is a simulation of radiation processes in the 
earth's atmosphere caused by solar, terrestrial, and atmospheric radiation 
transfer.  Students analyze temperature data measured by a balloon 
(radiosonde) that they "launch" both in the morning and evening over four 
types of terrain (sand, plowed field, grass or fresh snow).  As the 
balloon is dragged and dropped to various heights in the simulated 
atmosphere, the temperatures at these altitudes are automatically plotted 
on a graph.  Several temperature profiles may be plotted concurrently to 
compare differences before clearing the graph.
 

Figure 3.  RadiationSim

The students are asked to explore the various temperature profiles that 
can occur under different surface conditions and times of day.  Then they 
answer questions designed to test their understanding of the concepts 
experienced in the simulation.  Specifically, the questions address the 
effects of ground cover, time of day and altitude on temperature.  
Students may use the simulation in any manner they feel necessary in order 
to answer the questions.

Instructional Goals
The Radiation Balance Simulation has two instructional goals.  First, it 
provides an environment in which beginning students can assume the role of 
scientist.  Second, if students reason beyond the data collected, the 
simulation raises some interesting "why" questions that lead to a much 
deeper understanding of long and short wave radiation.

For these goals to be met, the instructor must support the simulation by 
creating the proper initial environment, emphasizing the process of 
scientific discovery, and building higher level discussions on the 
student's RadiationSim experience.  Strategies for providing that support 
are discussed herein.

Assigning RadiationSim
This simulation is intended to be the initial simulated activity the 
students encounter in the meteorology course.  It is also intended to be a 
pre-lecture experience rather than a post-lecture practice assignment.  
Experience has shown that this is a new type of learning endeavor for most 
students and much scaffolding needs to be provided.  The mechanics of the 
simulation should be demonstrated and some global strategies should be 
discussed.  It is most important, however, that the teacher's role not 
usurp the critical learning opportunities from the students.  The 
teacher's role can be seen more clearly if the learning goals are 
understood.

During this initial simulation the students should begin to develop a 
strong Problem Solving Strategy.  Most students are very weak in this area 
and need considerable encouragement in developing this skill.  An example 
of a Problem Solving Strategy that is the desired result from the use of 
RadiationSim is as follows:

1. Explore the simulation, identifying the inputs, outputs and goals.
2. Estimate and note the expected outcomes.
3. Develop a plan to test these expectations.
4. Collect sufficient data and record results.
5. Analyze and summarize the data.
6. Compare and contrast the results with the expected results.
7. Question the reasonableness of the results and seek explanations for 
them.
8. Rethink the process, identifying additional data that needs to be 
collected and important questions that need to be resolved.

With these expectations in mind, it is recommended that the teacher 
demonstrate the simulation by showing how to activate it, set the 
parameters, move the balloon, plot the points and read the graph.  
Students should then be challenged to "become a meteorologist" and make 
predictions about the relationships among ground cover, time of day, 
altitude and temperature.  

Students would be encouraged to develop a plan to test their expectations 
and, after using the simulation, reach a conclusion about the accuracy of 
their predictions.  At this point in the learning process, it is important 
for students to develop their own strategy to test their theories; the 
teacher will present the "ideal" Problem Solving Strategy only after 
students have generated one of their own.

Post-Simulation Activity
Following students' use of the simulation, it is recommended that students 
be assigned a small group activity of sharing strategies used with the 
simulation exercise and agreeing on a good strategy.  The teacher can 
solicit strategies from selected groups, outline one or two good 
approaches and discuss their merits.  During this time the eight steps in 
the Problem Solving Strategy listed above can be presented and "methods" 
of meteorology can be described.  Experience has shown that special 
attention also needs to be given to interpretation of graphs and their use 
to represent relationships of this type.  The use of symbolic 
representation is a deficiency in many a student's knowledge base.

After the strategies have been covered, the results from the simulation 
can be shared.  Questions of reasonableness of the conclusions and 
scientific basis for these phenomena can be raised.  Suggested questions 
that may be helpful in initiating discussion are listed below.  These 
questions should lead directly to a lecture on long and short wave 
radiation and their interaction with the earth's temperature.

Suggested Thought Questions for Class or Group Discussion
1. Of the four surfaces in RadiationSim (sand, plowed field, grass and 
snow), which one gets the hottest during the daytime?  The coldest?  Why?
2. How does temperature change with altitude?  How do the daytime air 
temperatures above each surface compare with nighttime?  How are they the 
same?  How are they different?  What causes the differences?
3. Focus on the temperature changes between 0 and 600 meters for all four 
surfaces.  As altitude increases in the daytime, what happens to the 
temperature?  What about nighttime?  What causes nighttime temperatures to 
increase below 600 meters?
4. What makes the earth warm?
5. What happens to the sun's energy after it strikes the earth?  Where 
does it go?  Why doesn't the earth become progressively warmer with time?
6. If heat from the sun passes through the atmosphere on its way to the 
earth's surface, does this heat make the atmosphere as warm as the earth's 
surface?  Explain the reasons for your answer.
7. What change (if any) would there be in the average temperature of the 
earth's surface if there were no atmosphere?


Lecture Outline
I.    All objects (above absolute zero) emit radiation.
A. Higher temperature = the maximum emission of radiant energy occurs at 
shorter wavelengths (sun ~ 0.5um)
B. Lower temperature = the maximum emission of radiant energy occurs at 
longer wavelengths (earth ~ 10um)
II.   Objects not only radiate energy, they absorb it as well.
A. Warming = (energy absorbed > energy radiated)
B. Cooling = (energy absorbed < energy radiated)
III.   Substances often interact with radiation in curious ways
A. The atmosphere absorbs some wavelengths and is transparent to others.
1. It is largely transparent to visible radiation from the sun.
2. It absorbs and re-emits certain wavelengths in the IR region.  This 
helps warm the earth's surface and lower atmosphere.
B. Clouds are also good absorbers at some wavelengths and poor absorbers 
at others.
1. They are poor absorbers of visible solar radiation because they reflect 
much of the sunlight back into space.
2. They are good absorbers and emitters of IR radiation from the earth.
3. Thus, clouds tend to keep daytime temperatures lower and nighttime 
temperatures higher.
IV.   An object that reflects a great deal of sunlight absorbs very little 
short-wave radiant energy.
A. Albedo: the reflectivity of a surface.
B. Objects that absorb radiation will heat up even if they are good 
emitters.
V.     Radiation exchange
A. The sun radiates short-wave energy to the earth.
B. The earth absorbs this solar energy and re-radiates it to the 
atmosphere as IR.
C. The atmosphere absorbs IR energy from the earth and re-radiates it back 
to earth. 



Mountain Simulation

Description of Simulation
MountainSim (Figure 4) models the adiabatic process of a rising and 
falling air mass.  An animated air mass, whose temperature and vapor 
pressure are displayed numerically and graphically, passes over a 
mountain.  The student's goal is either to cause precipitation at a given 
altitude or to produce a specified temperature increase when the air mass 
descends.  To reach these goals, the student must set the initial 
temperature and vapor pressure values for the air mass.  When set in 
motion, the simulation animates the air movement and any precipitation 
that occurs.  Two graphs are also displayed.  One graph plots temperature 
and vapor pressure for the air mass and the other shows temperature and 
altitude.  A notebook that records all trials is also provided.


 

Figure 4.  MountainSim

A deep understanding of the simulation involves the ability to cause 
precipitation at a specified altitude, predict and produce temperature 
changes, and interpret and use the graphical representations.  Students 
who make use of the notebook are usually the most successful.

Instructional Goals
The use of MtnSim supports two major goals.  It provides a semi-controlled 
opportunity for students to exercise skills in scientific reasoning and 
problem solving, and it serves as a foundation for understanding adiabatic 
phenomena.  For these goals to be met the instructor must take care in 
assigning the simulation and must follow the simulation experience with 
discussion of problem solving strategies.

Assigning MtnSim
As with the previous simulation, MountainSim is intended for use before 
rather than after any lecture on related topics.  Experience has shown, 
however, that the simulation should be previewed in class prior to asking 
the students to use it.  The operational features of the simulation should 
be demonstrated and the graphs and dials explained.  The permanent line on 
the vapor pressure vs. temperature graph should be identified as the vapor 
saturation curve.  However, students should not be told how to solve the 
problems.

It is recommended that students be advised to play with the simulation and 
then to complete the assigned tasks.  They should be strongly encouraged 
to make and test predictions as well as to try and explain the events they 
observe.  The following Problem Solving Strategy (or one similar to it) 
should have resulted from the discussion of the earlier Radiation Balance 
Simulation experience:

1. Explore the simulation, identifying the inputs, outputs and goals.
2. Estimate and note the expected outcomes.
3. Develop a plan to test these expectations.
4. Collect sufficient data and record results.
5. Analyze and summarize the data.
6. Compare and contrast the results with the expected results.
7. Question the reasonableness of the results and seek explanations for 
them.
8. Rethink the process, identifying additional data that needs to be 
collected and important questions that need to be resolved.

Post-Simulation Activity
Following students' use of the simulation, the strategies for completing 
the tasks and the conclusions that were reached can be shared.  As in the 
Radiation Balance Simulation, a small group activity is a good method to 
encourage students to share and justify their observations.  Some or all 
the following conclusions should result from group discussions:

1. The temperature of the air mass decreases as the air rises.
2. If the temperature decreases to a point on the vapor saturation curve, 
precipitation occurs.
3. Only if precipitation occurs is the final temperature of the air mass 
higher than the initial temperature.
4. The temperature vs. vapor pressure plot does not cross the vapor 
saturation curve.
5. For a given initial temperature, higher vapor pressures produce 
precipitation at lower altitudes.
6. The temperature of the air passing over the mountain changes at 
different rates depending on the occurrence of precipitation.

Group observations can lead to questions of why these phenomena occur and 
set the stage for the subsequent lecture.  The following thought questions 
can also be used to promote deeper thinking about the processes occurring 
in the simulation. 

Suggested Thought Questions for Class or Group Discussion

MtnSim Humidity

1. If the simulation forms a cloud at a vapor pressure of 10 mb and a 
given initial temperature, what change must be made in the initial 
temperature to prevent the formation of a cloud at 10 mb of pressure?  Why 
does this temperature change prevent the cloud from forming?
2. If the simulation forms a cloud at an air temperature of 20 C. and a 
given initial vapor pressure, what change must be made to the initial 
vapor pressure to prevent a cloud from forming at a temperature of 20 C.?  
Why does this vapor pressure change prevent the formation of a cloud?
3. What causes condensation?  (Beginning at point A in Figure 5 below, 
what changes in initial temperature and/or pressure would cause a cloud to 
form?)  Give at least two answers.
4. Under what meteorological conditions would the temperature of an air 
mass decrease?
5. Under what meteorological conditions would the vapor pressure of an air 
mass increased?


Figure 5.  Saturation Vapor Curve

MtnSim Advection

1. Two air masses pass over identical mountains.  In one air mass 
precipitation occurs at the base of the mountain and continues to the 
top.  For the other air mass no precipitation occurs.  If the initial 
temperatures of the two air masses are the same, will their temperatures 
still be the same at the mountain peaks?  Explain your answer. 
2. What about the temperatures of the two air masses when they descend to 
the bases of the mountains on the leeward side?  Will they be higher, 
lower or the same as their initial temperatures?

MtnSim Adiabatic

1. Why does air cool when it rises but warm when it descends?
2. Why are there no clouds on the side of the mountain where the air 
descends?
3. What causes the temperature change from one side of the mountain to the 
other?

Lecture Outline
I. Cloud formation
A. Evaporation
B. Warm air rises, expands and cools
C. Condensation
1. Saturation vapor pressure
2. Dew point
3. Latent heat
II. Adiabatic process
A. Dry adiabatic rate
B. Moist adiabatic rate


Other course components
AdvectionSim
Clouds and Storms
Severe weather contest

Student Evaluation








